# Artistic representation of data


Results of scientific simulations can be transformed into art that engages an audience. Visualisation can be beautifully enhanced when presented interactively and synchronised with music. It may also be represented as something abstract or tangible.


So what makes visualisations artistic? Collaborating artists and leaders of Google’s data visualisation research group, Fernanda Viégas and Martin Wattenberg, say artistic visualisations are visualisations that are made with the intent of creating art. It isn’t just about visualisations being beautiful.


__Simulation of fluids over obstacles__


This kind of simulation can be used by artists to express abstract concepts. The still image below can be explained as fluid flowing through stones. It can be stable or turbulent just like our lives. This type of simulation can also be used to track fluid flow within the human body when we add interactivity to the visualisation.


### Demoscene

Demoscene is an art movement that was born in the underground computer programming scene as a product of extreme programming and self-expression.

Demoscene combines programming, art and music and has inspired millions of people by connecting mathematics with art. It began in the 1980s and 90s and was very popular when 8-bit computers hit the consumer market.

Computers from that era were very slow and demosceners used mathematical hacking and programming tricks to achieve maximum performance. This resulted in many so called demoscene parties being organised across the globe, especially in Europe where people competed against each other to create beautiful visualisations using complex algorithms.

These competitions included different categories to challenge the coders. For example, 4kb Intros. For this category the creators had to write and compile code so the final executable would run on a PC with a file size not more than 4096 bytes. These constraints inspired coders to be creative writing small, super-efficient code.

Many demoscene productions were inspired by real science which was presented in very creative ways, for example fluid flows, particle simulations, image effects and virtual realities.

### Interactive art

Reefs on the Edge (2012) scientific data was translated to an interactive table using a tangible user input instead of an abstract graphical input such as a computer mouse. The table allowed users to simulate the effect of increasing the sea temperatures which then simulated the results of the coral survival and bleaching.

Artistic metaphor and interaction allows people to interact with data by engaging with and exploring data both visually and physically. Museum installations, such as Reefs on the Edge, allow people with different learning styles to explore data in different contexts. It engages a wider audience than academic or scientific research can by itself and helps people think about data differently.


### Hardware

Visualisation laboratories are being built in universities and research facilities around the globe to enhance and support ways of interacting with data.

These include hemispherical domes, cylindrical screens, cinema settings, cave automatic virtual environments (CAVE) and interactive walls.

Most visualisations are in 2D, 3D and sometimes using stereoscopic 3D displays—especially for games and scientific applications. Portable devices are increasingly being used to present and interact with data using visualisation. Having access to cheap visualisation hardware has created a new market. Now you can buy virtual reality glasses commercially.

A CAVE is an immersive virtual reality space. It’s typically a video theatre situated within a larger room where the user wears 3D glasses to see 3D graphics generated by the CAVE. The walls of a CAVE are made up of rear-projection screens and the projection systems are of very high-resolution. This is because of the near distance viewing which requires very small pixel sizes in order to retain the illusion of reality.

For instance, “the Monash CAVE2 is a next generation hybrid 2D and 3D virtual reality environment that combines Monash’s expertise in high-performance computing, computer graphics and networks to render terascale datasets in unparalleled clarity. As the viewfinder of the 21st Century Microscope, CAVE2 enables the interactive exploration of data from sources including the Australian Synchrotron, electron microscopes, and medical imaging instruments.”


__QUT Cube__

The Cube is one of the world’s largest digital interactive learning and display spaces dedicated to providing an inspiring, explorative and participatory experience of Science and Engineering research at Queensland University of Technology (QUT).

The Cube consists of 48 multi-touch screens soaring across two storeys. Housed in QUT’s Science and Engineering Centre, The Cube is a hub for scientific and digital exploration. It’s an example of an interactive wall.


__Portable hardware solutions for virtual reality (VR)__

Virtual reality is almost everywhere, thanks to simple solutions such as Google Cardboard. Companies such as Facebook (Oculus), Samsung, Sony and HTC are competing to make affordable VR hardware for the general public. You can run Google Cardboard with your iPhone.
